Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lop, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Michael Mann. He's presidential
Distinguished Professor in the Department of Earth and Environmental
Science at the University of Pennsylvania, and today we're
going to talk about his latest. Book which he
co-wrote with Dr. Peter Hotez, Science Under Siege How
to Fight the Five Most Powerful Forces that Threaten
our World. So Dr. Mann, welcome to the show.
It's an honor to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. It's great to be with you.
So, uh, tell us first, what is the main
argument of your book and particularly why did you
feel the need to write it, I mean, uh,
last year, 2025, but at this particular moment?
Yeah, thanks. It's a great question because when uh
Peter and I began writing this book, It was
actually 2.5 years ago, so it was before this
latest election, um, which brought Donald Trump back to
power, and, uh, of course, we've seen him implement,
uh, uh, you know, exactly the sort of agenda
that we warn about. In the book, uh, which
is this sort of anti-science agenda, ideologically driven, uh,
anti-science agenda, um, in service of climate denial, uh,
in service of the fossil fuel industry, um, and,
uh, their effort to sort of double down on
our reliance on fossil fuels, and of course, uh,
Something that's really only emerged over the last half
decade, which is this strong sort of strain of
um of anti-vax sentiment. Uh, AND the rejection of
the, um, you know, the, the findings of the
public health community by conservatives, by, you know, so-called
MAGA conservatives, and, uh, this has come together in
sort of a perfect storm. That's really how the
book came into being, because it was at the
very beginning of the pandemic when I saw um
my uh friend, my now good friend and colleague
and co-author, uh, Peter Hotez being subject to the
same sorts of attacks that we climate scientists had
been subjected to for decades, and I reached out
to him, um, because I felt we had some
lessons to, to offer them as to how to
deal with this, these sorts of assaults. And, um,
and that grew to a friendship and a partnership,
and we realized that we really had a book
to write about sort of the commonality. Between the
sort of anti-science sentiment in our two respective fields,
and what we can learn from it, and, and
how we can try to move ahead, and of
course, it takes on a particular salience now in
the era of Trump 2.0, although it's not actually
a scenario that we Envisioned when we first wrote
the book, but what's played out has really reinforced
the warnings of the book and the urgency of
fighting this increasingly dangerous and pervasive anti-science and disinformation
in service of anti-science.
Yes, the timing of the release of the book
was actually very interesting. So, but what do you
mean in the book by anti-science? I mean, how
can we identify something or label something as anti-science?
Yeah, that's another. Great question, because, you know, there
are areas of science that are disputed, um, and
where scientists, uh, may differ in their interpretation of
the data and come to different, uh, determinations, uh,
different conclusions, and, and that's all part of the
healthy sort of self-correcting machinery of science that uh
the great Carl Sagan spoke so eloquently about. And
so we have to distinguish between that sort of
good faith, give and take, and debate. That not
only exists in science, but must exist in science,
and what I would call uh the bad faith
rejection of uh mainstream scientific findings, where the overwhelming
consensus of the world scientists is rejected, um, uh,
based on arguments that don't hold up to the
slightest bit of scrutiny. That's not skepticism, that's the
opposite of skepticism, and those who sort of, again,
Uh, dismissed the mainstream findings of science based on
the flimsiest of evidence, are hardly skeptics, even though
they'd like to call themselves that. Um, THEY'RE, they're
science deniers, and typically, there's an ideological reason, it's
motivated reasoning. It isn't that they've come to some
different conclusion based on an honest look at the
at the data and and the evidence, it's that
they have come to certain politically expedient or ideologically
motivated conclusions, and have worked back to what they
believe has to be true. To support their positions.
Um, AND, and that's what we see today, that's
what we see, so, you know, again, so pervasively
in the world of climate science, and certainly in
the public health arena as well.
Yes. Uh, SO apart from, and of course I'm
going to ask you more specifically about climate science,
which is your field of expertise and also in
recent years, uh, after and during the COVID-19 pandemic
about the rise or real rise of anti-vaccine positions,
uh, but are there other ways in Which anti-science
has manifested itself in recent years. I mean, are
there any other particular topics you see that it
has manifested itself about in recent years, or are
there specific ways it has manifested? Could you tell
us a little bit more about that?
Yeah, thanks. It's another great question, uh, because of
course, Peter and I focus really. Primarily on our
experiences in these two worlds, in the world of
vaccines, public health, and, and, in the world of
climate science. Um, BUT, uh, there are so many
examples, uh, where the findings of science have found
themselves on a collision course with, um, ideologically or
motivated individuals or institutions, um. And it's true in
climate change because the fossil fuel industry has a
vested interest here, um, in our continued reliance on
fossil fuels, even though that is creating this you
know, this, this epistemic threat of, uh, you know,
of, of catastrophic climate change. Um, THE same thing,
uh. You know, the, um, there, there are, and
we go through the book because you really have
to understand the history of what unfolded during the
pandemic to understand why right wing um interests have
aligned themselves with with anti-science in the COVID arena.
And it actually has to do with early on
when, you know, public health uh leaders were calling
for uh social distancing and, and lockdowns to stem
the spread of the pandemic. Uh, THAT was leading
to a decrease in transportation and fossil fuel usage,
and that was hurting, the fossil fuel industry, and
it was hurting um individuals like the Koch brothers,
who are the owners of the largest petrochemical, uh,
privately held petrochemical interest in the US. And so
they decided to fund these efforts that were aimed
at attacking the public health scientists, and discrediting the
notion that we needed lockdowns, that we needed social
distancing, that we needed stay at home orders, uh,
it was hurting their bottom line. And so we
have to understand, you know, some of the factors
that sort of entered in that led, you know,
so those are those two issues. I just spent
a whole lot of time talking about them. But,
you know, also, you know, there's the, the epidemic
of guns in the US and, and, and, and,
um. And, and the needless uh loss of lives,
because um we're not listening to the science, to
people actually study, uh, sort of this, um, you
know, this epidemic, if you will, of, of, um,
you know, of, of uh Uh, mass shootings that
we see in the United States, um, on a
regular basis. And, you know, and there's, there is
an understanding, um, within, you know, the, the scholarly
community about what sort of policies actually prevent that.
And, and, and, and those very policies are opposed
by a powerful interest group in the US, the
National Rifle Association, which is aligned itself with the
Republican Party. Um, THERE are examples, uh, uh, pollutants,
um, you know, uh, air and water pollutants, uh,
mercury pollution, for example, is associated with, um, fossil
fuels, and, and there the fossil fuel industries, uh,
the global plastic pollution problem, and again, the The
beverage industry here in the petrochemical industry relies on
the continued manufacturing of single-use plastics, even though these
are harmful to us, they're harmful to the environment.
Um, AND so the list goes on, and literally
anytime, you know, I, I forgot the most important
one of all. Um, IT, in fact, it, it
was Where the very rulebook that is used now
by bad actors to dispute science they find inconvenient,
uh, the tobacco industry, and the fact that their
own research showed that their product was killing people.
In fact, um, doubt is our product, was a
line from an internal tobacco industry memo. They understood
that the only way they could continue to profit
was to, uh, literally. Discredit the emerging science that
their own scientists had secretly affirmed that their product
was killing large numbers of people, and that the
rule book that the tobacco industry basically wrote, which
was to lavishly fund advocates, uh, to, um, uh,
you know, to promote their position, um, to attack
the science, to create front groups and organizations whose
sole reason for Existence was to attack the science
and to dispute the science and to call for,
you know, debate that we need to debate whether
or not this is a problem. The idea that
there are two equal sides, um, when in fact
the science was overwhelmingly telling us one thing, tobacco
products were killing people, fossil fuels are killing people
too, and the fossil fuel industry has run with
the rulebook written by the tobacco industry.
Mhm. Yes, and I think that that rule book
and the case of the tobacco industry was very
well explored and in lots of detail in the
book. I hope I'm remembering correctly the book Merchants
of Doubt
by my good friend
Naomi Oreskes, yeah, yeah, yeah,
I met Naomi Oreskes and Eric Conway, um, a
definitive treatise really on. You know, on the, the
mechanisms of anti-science and how dangerous they are to
us.
Yes, I, I've met Doctor Oreskes on the show
in 2023, so she's very, a very fascinating person.
His name is great. Yes, good friend of mine,
and I'm a big, big fan of hers.
So when it comes to climate change, of course
climate change denial is not something that just appeared
recently in the 2020s. I mean it's much older
than that, but do you have the feeling that
in more recent In recent years it has gotten
worse in any way or that perhaps this kind
of narrative has more support from powerful figures and
powerful players in the media and other places.
Yeah, what I would say it's, it's sort of
morphed over the last 5 to 10 years and
actually my, uh, two books ago, uh, not my
most recent book, but the book before that, um.
Uh, WAS, uh, uh, the, the, the, um, the
new climate war, um, is the title of the
book, and it was about that, about how the
attack on climate science by the fossil fuel industry
and those advocating for them has evolved from what
historically was a Direct assault on the science itself.
And what's happened is we can see what's happening
with our own two eyes. It's very difficult for
polluters and those promoting their agenda to deny that
climate change is happening because we're, we're, we're literally
experiencing it. So what they've done is they've moved
to other tactics, um, rather than denial, outright denial
itself, and there's been a bit of a resurgence,
um, of, of, of, of sheer outright science denial
over the past, uh, year or two, especially during
the era of Trump, and, and the era during
which powerful plutocrats like Elon Musk have, uh, bought
out social media platforms like Twitter, and, uh, and,
and, and, uh, tweak the algorithms to favor the
promotion of anti-science on COVID, on climate. So there's
been a bit of a resurgence on, you know,
outright denial that it's happening, but by and large,
uh, polluters, and again, those advocating for The, politicians
and right wing media outlets and the hired talking
heads, um, they have sort of evolved in their
talking points away from, you know, for the most
part, that climate change isn't happening to, well, maybe
it's happening. So, stopping short of denial, but turning
to other tactics that still lead to the same
place, that still sort of favor this notion that
we don't need to do anything, that we can
continue to burn fossil fuels, we don't need renewable
energy. So what are those tactics? And not so
much denial, they're deflection. Deflecting attention away from the
needed policies. They are division, getting climate advocates fighting
with each other online, on social media. It's a
divide and conquer strategy, and they do that with
bot armies and troll farms. Uh, THERE is, um,
doomism, in fact, uh, interestingly, you might think about
doomism. Well, if you really believe that it's too
late to do anything about the problem, that leads
you. Down the same path of inaction as outright
denial, and increasingly we see bad actors fanning the
flames of climate doomism to convince erstwhile climate advocates,
those who would otherwise be on the front lines
demanding action, to convince them, hey, it's too late
anyways, uh, to move them from the front lines
to the sidelines, whereas what, where, that's where the
bad actors want them to be. And so, There
are all of these other uh tactics, um, and
I've, I, I like to use alliteration, uh, they
all start with D, um, that stop, stop short
of denial, but still lead us to the same
place. Um, THEY still favor. He, um, you know,
the status quo, um, an agenda of business as
usual, reliance on fossil fuels.
Do you think that uh these kinds of uh
anti-science sort of manifestations, uh, like climate change denial,
uh, being anti-vaccine and other uh positions related with,
uh, medicine, healthcare, the tobacco industry, and so on.
Do you look at them as being part of
a long trend, a trend that's been occurring that
we've been seeing in the United States and perhaps
some other countries as well over the past few
decades of anti-intellectual. ISM and anti-expert takes, particularly now
amplified by the internet and social media, particularly, even
though we also, of course, uh, listen to them
and watch them on the, on mainstream media.
Yeah, I mean, no, no question, um, it, it,
it's impossible to separate anti-science. From the sort of
larger problem that afflicts us in the United States
in particular, but um elsewhere as well, um, this
trend towards anti-intellectualism, the rejection of elites, uh, and
in fact, that's where it's really important. To understand
the tactics of some of the, the key bad
actors here, like the Koch brothers. Um, THE Koch
brothers, who again, the owners of the largest, uh,
it's just one Koch brother now, David Koch, passed
away a few years ago, but his legacy lives
on, um, and it's a, it's, it's a horrible
legacy. Um, THE, the Koch brothers, uh, funded all
of these think tanks and front groups that, uh,
don't just deny climate change, but they promote a
libertarian agenda. Um, THIS idea that we don't need
government, we don't need regulations, and It's impossible to
extricate that sort of thinking from the idea that
we don't need, if we don't need experts, then
we don't need intellectuals, and we don't need to
be listening to those talking heads who claim they
know all the answers, because, hey, they're they're just
taking away your freedom to do what you want
to do, and so it's tied inextricably to this
sort of libertarian philosophy that um You know, that
that there are no experts uh that we need
to take advice from, uh, that we don't need
to be told what to do, and we should
reject elites, and we should reject um experts, because
in that free for all, in that environment, where
there are no trusted voices, and no experts, and
No way to distinguish what's right from what's wrong,
that plays to the agenda of these bad actors
who want uh unfettered access to the reins of
our government, to our economy. Um, THEY want to
make, you know, uh in, in, in a world
that has no rules. Um, THESE bad actors prosper,
and that's what we're seeing right now. And that's
why we're seeing this, uh, effort right now, um,
which is the realization of so-called Project 2025, which
was basically this agenda that was written for a
second Trump term by the Koch brothers, by these
libertarian plutocrats, um, who, who fund, uh, these, you
know, the attacks on, on science. Uh, THEY basically
wrote a blueprint for what they wanted Trump to.
You know, to do if he got a second
term. It was basically an agreement they reached. We
will support you, even though you're not actually our
favorite candidate, if you do what we want you
to do, if you appoint our people to run
all your agencies, and that's exactly what he's done.
And so we now have individuals at the EPA,
at the, uh, you know, the uh at the,
um, Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, uh,
the Department of Interior, all staffed by sort of
Koch brother approved candidates who are implementing their agenda
of deregulation, literally tearing down all of the institutions
that were built up under Republican and Democratic administrations
over decades to protect the people and to protect
the environment. All of that infrastructure is being torn
down as we speak. Um, THEY'RE also attacking the
scientific infrastructure. For obvious reasons, because they don't like
the message of the science and the scientists. Um,
IT sounds like really bad news. Uh, THERE'S hope
that, um, in this next midterm election, uh, given
the groundswell of opposition we're now seeing to Trump
and the GOP and their policies, we could very
well see a shift in the control of Congress.
And that could sort of, um, That could alter
the balance of power in a way that at
the very least slows down this current agenda, the
Trump 2.0 agenda, until a new president is elected.
So, tell us a little bit about I'll walk
us through briefly, of course, because we don't have
enough time to explore them in lots of detail
here, but the five main forces that you identify
in the book as being anti-science, and you talk
about, namely the plutocrats, the authoritarian patrostats assisted by
polluters and the politicians who advocate for them. The
pros who use their professional and sometimes scholarly credentials
to deceive or promote unsupported contrarian views, the propagandists
who amplify these views on social media and other
venues, I mean, what we, or sometimes people, sociologists
and others call alternative media or new media on
the. Internet and also the 5th force or the
5th element here is also the press, including the
mainstream press. So tell us a little bit about
each of them and the roles they play in
this sort of anti-science movement.
Yeah, thanks. It's, and as you can see again,
I'm a sucker for alliteration and so. Each of
these begins with, with a P, um, as you
said, it's the, it's the, um, you know, the
petrostates, the plutocrats, the pros, the propagandists, and the
press, not, not the press uniformly, but many, um,
media institutions, um, in today's world. And so they
form this sort of ecosystem, um, where they're working
together to advance this anti-science agenda, um. And so
you have, for example, the plutocrats, we've talked about
some of them already, uh, you know, uh, the,
the Koch brothers, um, but we'd have to include
Rupert Murdoch, um, in that group as well, and
his global media empire, which he's weaponized to promote
anti-science, climate denial, attack renewable energy, um, COVID-19, uh,
conspiracy theories. Um, YOU'VE got Elon Musk. You know,
who, who is sort of undergone this Bond villain-like
arc from an erstwhile environmental hero to an environmental
villain now, and he's weaponized, you know, we, with
um help from Saudi Arabia and Russia, and that's
important because that'll take us to the Petro states.
Um, Trump, uh, I mean, uh, Musk purchased a
Twitter and turned it into Uh, uh, again, a,
um, a cesspool where anti-science, uh, flourishes now. I,
it literally changed the algorithm to pump up the
anti-science, and to suppress the voices of actual scientists
in, in, in the actual scientific community.
And in that particular case, it's even further amplified
by his own AI chatbot, Grok.
Absolutely Grok, you know, that, um, can, you know,
is often promoted that anti-science now under the, uh,
you know, auspices of an ostensible, you know, uh,
you know, AI, um, sort of, uh, You know,
these chatbots, um, these, uh, like, um, like Grock
and like, um, you know, uh, chat GPT and
uh Claude and, uh. The, the rest of them,
um, they're often seen by the public as authoritative
figure. You ask them a question, you get a,
you know, authoritative, comprehensive, and unbiased answer. And so
it's particularly egregious when in fact, Grok has been
programmed to give biased answers, um. But, but they're
interpreted as somehow having the authoritative, uh, sort of
underpinnings of this, this AI, um, so absolutely. So
those are, you know, some of the chief plutocrats,
these are extremely wealthy, you know, billionaires who have
used their wealth and power to promote their own
interests, which often align with an anti-science agenda. Now,
on their own, Their influence might be limited, but
one of the things that they've done is to
fund all of these think tanks and front groups,
and talking heads who appear on news programs, um,
to create this sort of, and, and, uh. Troll
armies and and bot farms on social media. Um,
THEY funded a lot of the anti-science infrastructure that's
so pervasive now in our media, and our, our
social media. I mentioned, you know, petro states, uh,
Russia and Saudi Arabia, leveraged, uh, you know, uh,
Musk's buyout of Twitter. Why did They do that
because they, you know, a Petrastate is, is a,
is a nation state that derives its wealth and
influence primarily from its fossil fuel reserves, it's natural
resources, um, and its economy is based on the
extraction of natural resources, um, and, uh. These, uh,
you know, uh, petrostates tend to be authoritarian states,
uh, as well. They tend to have, um, tremendous
amounts of, uh, societal inequity, and so petrostate is
sort of almost a catch-all for these authoritarian nations
that have joined forces with these plutocrats to promote
misinformation and disinformation, and a lot of those bot
armies and troll farms are actually um Uh, they,
they are, uh, state associated. They are black ops,
you know, operations run by Russia and Saudi Arabia
to pollute the public sphere with propaganda that favors
them. Um, THEN you've got, you know, the pros,
as you mentioned, uh, these are the talking heads
who have seemingly impressive credentials, who go on Fox
News, um, or who write op-eds in leading newspapers,
um. Attacking the science of climate change, attacking renewable
energy, attacking vaccinations, attacking the public health community, um,
and they get paid, uh, by, you know, for,
for that work that they're doing. Um, AND then
the propagandists, the main distinguished. Distinguishing feature between the
pros and the propagandists is the pros are actually
getting paid or remunerated in some way for spreading
misinformation. The propagandists, by and large, do it for
free. They're just part of this army of uh
bad actors who are out there um promoting the
misinformation and disinformation on social media, um, for example.
But,
but some of them are paid.
And some of them are paid, and so the,
the, the sort of distinction between prose and propagandists
is a little loose, um, because many of them
are both, uh, uh, and, uh, the, the primary
distinction is simply if they're being paid for it,
or if they're doing it for free, uh, they're
doing it for ideological reasons or what have you.
Right. Then finally the press, and of course we're
talking about Fox News and the Murdoch media empire,
which is uh which Rupert Murdoch and um his
family now have have wielded as this, uh, you
know. As this um weapon uh to attack, you
know, the science of climate change, to attack um
uh vaccines. Uh, OBVIOUSLY, the right wing media, the
News Corp, and the, the Murdoch media are part
of that, um, but we also, uh, Take to
task, uh, many of the, you know, ostensible mainstream
media outlets, increasingly, what was once mainstream is no
longer, uh, because we're seeing in the United States
right now, literally plutocrats buying out our media outlets
like CBS, like the Washington Post, and, and. And
weaponizing them for, you know, as Jeff Bezos of
the, you know, who now owns the Washington Post,
even said that he was going to, you know,
change the editorial outlook of the Washington Post to
promote free markets and sort of a libertarian philosophy.
And so what counts as The mainstream press is
a little fluid right now, because uh once mainstream
outlets are now being bought out by plutocrats and
turned into right-wing outlets, CBS News being another example,
um, there are many others. Um, BUT we, you
know, point out, uh, instances where the New York
Times, The Washington Post, other presumably, you know, uh,
mainstream outlets have promoted. Some of the same anti-science
that we see on on these right wing outlets
like Fox News, and in many cases they do
it out of what we call a performative neutrality,
to show that they're being unbiased because they've been
attacked by the right for so long. Uh, THE,
the right in this country has cried liberal media
for decades, when the media was never liberal, it
was quite centrist overall, and in fact, you know,
we have a term for that in sports, we
call it working the refs. The right wing, the
right has been making this accusation over and over
again in the hope that the refs, the media
outlets, will move in the direction. They want them
to move, and, and that's happened. And uh one
of the ways that's happened is uh this idea
that to be balanced, uh, media outlets have to
platform both sides. What does both sides mean when
we're talking about matters of science? Um, DOES both
sides mean that if you've got a NASA scientist
talking about, um, You know, uh, the search for
other planets, you need a member from the, uh,
a member of the Flat Earth Society, uh, debating
them on, on television. Uh, ESSENTIALLY, that's what we
see, where, you know, anti-vaxxers are, are held up
on a pedestal, given an equal platform with, um,
public health experts. The same thing with climate change,
where leading climate scientists are sort of, um, You
know, uh, put on uh uh. You find themselves
um competing with industry funded climate deniers, um, for
space in mainstream media outlets, uh. That, you know,
that performative neutrality has been particularly uh pernicious, precisely
because these outlets are perceived as being unbiased and
objective, and when they are promoting, you know, the
uh the the the the lab leak theory of
COVID-19, which the New York Times and The Washington
Post have both platformed. Um, OR, uh, you know,
uh, when they platform, you know, someone like Bjorn
Lundberg, who, you know, a climate denier who's given,
been given space on the pages of the New
York Times to promote anti-science nonsense about climate change.
Um, WHEN these outlets promote these contrarian views, unlike
the right wing media, there are a lot of
people in the political middle, or even on the
political left who are seeing that and saying, hey,
well, if the New York Times is saying it,
hey, if the Washington Post is saying it, hey,
if CBS News is saying it, there must be
something there. Um, THAT, that is especially pernicious, and
that's a big part of the problem.
Right, so, uh, you wrote this book with Doctor
Peter Hotez, you present those five main anti-science forces,
but at the same time, uh, I, I mean
I want to ask you this because It's not
only something that particularly on the right of the
political spectrum would be presented or even is presented
as an alternative view of a threat to science,
an alternative to the view you present in your
book, not only that, but also because it usually
targets specific. Vulnerable groups of people because there's this
common narrative or popular, particularly on the right narrative
that the real threats to science are the wokes
or wokeism and forces on the left, the radical
left, and so on that supposedly infiltrate. Of academia
and that oppose science and objective truth and even
outside of academia sometimes they claim that these woke
radical left forces have infiltrated other social and political
institutions as well. Is there any evidence at all
to support this kind of claim, or is it
part Of the same kind of anti-science narrative just
to uh promote prejudice against certain groups of people
and distract the general public from these uh real
anti-science forces.
Yeah, it's a great question. You know, it's sometimes
said that uh truth has a liberal bias or
science has a liberal bias in the sense that
if you simply follow what the science has to
say, um. You know, it, it, it, it, it
implies. Certain policies, right? Um, IF the science, and,
and, and this is betrayed by, you know, the
statements by leading climate deniers in the world of
politics like James Inhofe, the late James Inhofe, who's
senator, um, from Oklahoma, who led the attack on
climate science in the US Senate, uh, for, for
years, and he once said something that's very telling.
He said, you know, I You know, I, I
used to believe the science until I realized how
much it was going to cost. Now that's, that's
misleading because the, the cost of inaction on climate
is far greater than the, I wouldn't even call
the cost, than the investments necessary to address the
problem. So that's already a uh a very problematic
framing, but it does tell you something, right, that
he started out with his political views and worked
backwards. To determine what science, quote unquote, he needed
to believe. Um, AND in today's world, uh, of
alternative facts and fake news, you can always find,
you know, a whole television network that's promoting. Views
that are inconsistent with the laws of physics. The
laws of physics tells us the planet warms up
when you increase the concentration of carbon dioxide, which
is happening from fossil fuel burning. That's physics, and
if you deny that, you're, you're denying physics. And
so, part of the problem, as I said, is
that, you know, the science in a sense, has
a liberal bias, if you will. Only in the
sense that On issues like climate, um, the policy
views have fallen along now, uh, uh, uh, a
political spectrum where the political right is closely tied
to the fossil fuel industry and is opposed to
any actions to curtail fossil fuel burning, um, and
so they're forced into denying the science. If they
are to um justify their policy uh views. And
so it's motivated reasoning, um, I would say, and
also it's the art of projection, which has been
perfected by the political right back to the days
of Roy Cohn, um, the infamous Roy Cohn. Uh,
WHO, uh, was sort of an advisor, uh, to
Republicans during the McCarthy era, um, and Donald Trump
has said that he idolizes Roy Cohn. He has
been searching for his own Roy Cohn, and Roy
Cohn, uh, sort of was the architect of uh
projection as a political tool. What is projection? You
accuse your opponent of the very thing you are
guilty of. Because it tars them with that accusation,
and it immunizes you against it. It's like, what,
it's not me, it's them. Um, AND so we
have seen Donald Trump, um, is a classic, uh,
sort of, uh, user of deflection, where he literally
says the opposite of what is true, and all
too often a willing media. Act, you know, in
the United States right now act simply as a
stenographer. They don't even fact check, they don't even
assess, they just said, well, Donald Trump said that
the sky is actually green. You know, some scientists
say it's blue. I don't know. Donald Trump says
it's green, you decide. We're not going to tell
you. Um. And so, uh, so it's deflection, right?
So the accusation that academia has been, you know,
in the world of science has been populated by
all these woke people who are promoting an agenda.
They are literally accusing the scientific community and the
academic community. Of implementing their agenda. Their agenda has
been the effort, and we're seeing it right now,
to infiltrate academia, to use the power of the
White House, um, and the, the reins of government,
which are currently in the hands of Republicans, to
put pressure on academic institutions, uh, to, um, to
do away with academic freedom. Which is an essential
principle, um, in, you know, uh, that goes back
to the very beginnings, the foundations of, of, of,
of academia. Thomas Jefferson spoke eloquently, uh, when he
founded the University of Virginia of the importance of
academic freedom, that academia is this, um, Academia is
this, uh, environment where, you know, experts, uh, and
intellects are encouraged to speak plainly and to speak
truth to power, and speaking truth to power. IS
a threat to these bad actors, and that's why
they've gone after academia for so long. They're going
after it right now, and everything they accuse academia
and science of is simply What they're guilty of,
um, but they're hoping that people won't figure it
out. Hey, they're saying academia, you know, the science
is a bunch of woke, uh, individuals who are,
uh, implementing a scientist. No, scientists, there's a whole
scientific method, it's sometimes called, but there's a, there's
a whole sort of structure, um, and, and, and,
uh, a self-correcting machinery as Carl Sagan described it.
Um, IN the world of science, um, there are
rules of, uh, uh, you know, uh, rules of
engagement, um, and how science, uh, should be done,
um. Uh, AND, and, and, and, and, and, and,
and, and, again, machinery that, that, that leads us
to a better understanding of the world. If something's
wrong, Um, there are incentives in the world of
science to prove it wrong. Um, YOU get your
name on a science or Nature article if you
can prove that the conventional wisdom is wrong. So
the incentives actually are to move us in the
direction of reality, the, the, the, the, uh, the
direction of, uh, you know, um, objective truth. Uh,
AND again, to the bad actors that we're talking
about, to the political right who are attacking science,
that's a problem for them. They don't want academic
freedom. They don't want academics to be able to
speak plainly. They don't want scientists to be able
to speak plainly, to publish. Results that might conflict
with their ideological policy views, and that's why they're
accusing academia and the world of science of the
very tactics and the very motives that it turns
out they themselves are perennially guilty of.
So we have 5 more minutes. Let me just
ask you one last question. Apart from, of course,
reading your fantastic book with Dr. THAT you wrote
with Dr. Peter Hotez and reading all other books
like the one I mentioned by Dr. Oreskes, how
can we deal, I mean, what can we do
to deal with these threats and anti-science forces?
Yeah, you know, um, there, there's a lot that
we can do, and, and we try to sort
of lay out a prescription, um, in the book,
and each of the chapters, and, and especially in
the final chapter for how we go about fighting
this anti-science beast, and, um, you know, one of
them, one of the things we talk about is
the importance of scientists stepping up. Um, NOT all
of us, but some of us need to be
out there speaking to the public, speaking to policymakers,
um, getting the truth out because the other side
is extremely mobilized and getting Untruths out and promoting
the myths and conspiracy theories that support their agenda.
Um, SO it's absolutely important that scientists be out
there, that the scientific community, uh, the scientific institutions
provide resources, especially for young scientists who are interested
in engaging in communication and outreach. We have to
make sure that they have the tools and support
to do that. Um, CAUSE part of the, part
of the problem is the invisible scientist, um, to
the extent that scientists aren't out there in the
public sphere promoting the science, that creates a vacuum,
and that vacuum is going to be filled by
the voices of these bad actors who have, you
know, a vested interest and an agenda. Um, WE
talked about, uh, quite a bit about, um, you
know, the importance of, uh, you know, collective action,
particularly when it comes to politics. Um, EVERYTHING that
we're seeing right now, the attacks on science in
the public health arena, in the climate and renewable
energy arena that we're seeing right now with the
current administration, and with the GOP that's supporting their
agenda, um, that's all a result of the fact
that Not enough people who care about these things,
who care about scientific truth, who care about the
future of our planet, um, care about our children
and grandchildren. Not enough of those people turned out
in this last election. SOMETIMES said you, you know,
uh, elections have consequences, and this last election had
unimaginable consequences. It led us down this extremely dangerous
road where not only science and reason, but democracy
itself is very much under threat um today, and
that's all because not enough people who cared or
should care about these things turned out in the
last election. So, the single most important thing, and,
you know, there are things we can do at
the edges, but as long as the policy apparatus
is in the hands of the bad actors, um,
as long as the fox is guarding the hen
house, as it's sometimes said, um, it's extremely difficult.
For us to make any forward progress on any
of the great challenges we face, whether it's climate
or pandemics or anything else. In fact, we're making
negative progress. We're seeing scientific institutions, um, and we're
seeing, you know, uh, the infrastructure for environmental and
public health, um, protection, uh, literally dissolved, destroyed before
our eyes. Um, SO the elections have huge consequences.
The single most important thing that an individual can
do. Um, IN the United States is, is not
just vote, uh, but make sure everybody that they
know votes as well. Um, AND support, you know,
be out there speaking out, um, uh, speaking to
your friends and colleagues, figure out what role you
can play. Uh, WE all have different platforms, we
all have access to, to, to different platforms. Each
of us in our own way can influence others,
can influence them to vote, can influence them to
care about these things. Um, AND we can provide
support for organizations that, um, you know, environmental organizations,
public health organizations that are, are, are fighting, you
know, the fight, um, on the front lines, um,
uh, even in the presence of these, um, oppressive.
Forces of anti-science that we face right now. Um,
SO there's no shortage of things that that people
can do, but the single most important thing that
people can do. Is to use their vote and
their voice to influence policy because we can't make
the needed changes as individuals alone. We need to
act together so that we elect policymakers who can
support the needed systemic changes to confront these challenges.
OK, so Dr. Mann, let's end on that note.
The book is again Science Under Siege How to
Fight the Five Most Powerful Forces that Threaten our
World. I'm of course leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview, and thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show. As I said at the beginning, it's
been an honor to talk to you.
It's been an honor for me as well, Ricardo.
Thanks so much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Puntervan Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And Josnecht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.